This week gonna be the last
week. Uh, we have this lecture
and the lecture on Wednesday
gonna be the last lecture of
this semester. So yes.
And I hope you enjoyed it I
mean so far and
Uh, one thing is
that you can go to the I
mean, the student UWinsite.
Put your comments about this
course using the student
evaluation. The SET scores.
So please go there and then put
your comments about this course
there. Uh,
that survey is the official
survey by the school and
they gonna let me know your
comments and I will definitely
understand it in my next lecture
about this course.
Any other questions?
So let's start off. Before
I start today's lecture,
how many of you have actually
seen this movie? This is one of
the greatest movie in the
history of cinema.
2001: A Space Odyssey.
This movie is made by Stanley
Kubrick in 1968.
Anybody?
Nicholas, you saw
that. And you do you agree that
this is a great movie?
Oh Justin. For those that have
seen this movie, I mean, do you
believe that this is a great
movie? Oh yes, yeah for sure. And
for those of you that haven't
seen this movie, I highly
suggest this. It might be boring
for you at the end or something
like that, but it's definitely worth
the time to spend on watching
this movie and basically this
movie is about the main
evolutionary steps of the human
species from the very past up
until the future. So it starts
when we were an animal species
and then we were able to
make tools out of the bones, up
until here.
In this movie, it predicts that
human progress in technology
right now in the year
2001 gonna start from the bones as a simple
tool, up until building is
spacecraft or space ship and
exploring the universe.
And this image.
This is part of the movie. This
is one of the greatest match
card in the history of cinema
that actually brings this
progress in just one shot. I
mean from bone of the animals,
you could build tools up until
building the space ships and
exploring the universe.
So that's why this is called
Odyssey. I mean the human
Odyssey or a space Odyssey from
the ground to the space.
So, I thought that we can rename
our course. And also the next
course, Computer Architecture
2, to this name. I mean A
Digital Odyssey. Meaning that we
built this smallest unit of
digital system, the logic gates.
Uh, yeah, I mean, yes, yes.
You'll see later that I mean,
this is not just the fiction
inside a movie. I mean,
we'll see that we actually did
this progress. We will see in a few
slides, so we could say that, I
mean we passed and we are
going through the digital
Odyssey. We could build the
smallest unit of the digital
system using just the gates: AND gate, OR
gate, and NOT gate. And then we
build some combination of logic
or combinational circuit, and then on top of
that, we could build addition,
subtraction and multiplexers,
encoders and etc. And then for
the next step, we said that we want to
store some information. So
by the idea of repeating the
value. So by the idea of
feedback, and then we could build
latches, we could build flip
flops. So this is the Odyssey.
So we could build the flip flops
and then out of flip flops, we
could build a sequential logic.
I mean larger units to
do calculation that need to
store intermediate results. For
instance, the counters. So for
counting a number, we need to
store the immediate
number in order to go to the
next number. And that was the
sort of Odyssey or journey. I
mean, we said that we want to
build a system that calculates
or process the information in the
universe, and we said that the
continuous entities must be
discrete and for them to be discrete, we
proposed to represent them by
digits or symbols.
We said that we have a numbering system.
For hours in the numbering system, we
introduced logic gates and then
built the combinational logic,
storing the information and then
I mean doing some
analysis on the information that
we stored, and now the main task
is building a sophisticated
computer system to do any
general computation. So this
week gonna be about building the
computer system, using
the sequential logic or
combinational logic to build a
system that can analyze any
given information. So this
journey doesn't stop
here because this is our last
week. If you want to continue
this journey, you have to take
the Computer Architecture 2 in
the next semester and at the end
of that course, you finished this
Odyssey or this journey of I mean,
building a computer system. So
we start. I mean, we just
initially start at this step
and I hope
that I can motivate you to take
the Computer Architecture 2 class
to continue this journey.
So basically building a computer
system is like building a
telescope. So computer
science is not the science of
building computers. This slide
is from the
first week. We said that we want
to build computers, but
computer science is not the
science of building computers.
There are different disciplines.
But computers, if we could
build computers, the
computers can help the computer
scientist alot because they can
do calculations. Not through human
beings, but by some systems. This is
very similar to the astronomy
and telescopes. Although
astronomy is not the science of
building telescopes, you
could build telescopes, powerful
telescopes, so we can explore the
universe much more better, and
it helps the astronomers alot.
So that was the main goal
behind this course and the next
course. So we want to start
building computers today. I mean
this week. By using our
knowledge of numbering systems,
our knowledge of combinational
logic and sequential logic.
So the most simplest problems,
not only the simplest, but also the
I mean most essential problems
are calculating the distance:
height or length, as we said in
the first week of this course.
We said that in computer science,
there is a course or discipline
called theory of automata or theory
of computation. In some schools, they
call this theory of computer
science, which basically
tries to prove mathematically
that given a problem, is it
possible to solve that problem
by computer systems?
By this we mean that is it
possible to take some finite
steps to accomplish or to
solve that problem? And we are
building computers to take those
steps using some machines instead of through
human beings. And in this course,
they prove there's just a very small
portion of problems can be
solved by computer systems.
So the whole of this course and next
course is gonna be about building
such a system that can just
solve a very small portion of
problems, not all problems.
If we are
given a problem, and we could prove
that we can solve that problem
by computer systems, then we
write programs for that. So what
you did in the lab assignments
was this: so you write some
program by a programming
language, for instance C, C++,
Java or Python, or any other
programming languages. So these
languages for programming.
And by programming, you are
trying to solve that problem.
But before that,
computer scientists already
proved that that problem can be
solved by some programs.
There are a lot of
problems. Actually, infinite
problems that scientists proved that
you cannot solve by
any programs. There's no program
that can solve that
problem. Uh, this is the course
of. I mean, this is the course
where you deal with
such problems. So imagine we can
solve the problem and we can
write a program. But now, we want
to solve that problem by
computer systems. Any program
has two main parts: data and
algorithms. So in the data,
we store the information.
And then by the algorithm, we
analyze those information and we do
processing on those information.
And then finally, the result of
the algorithm gonna be
represented as new data. So the
input information and the output
information of the
processing are both data.
The algorithm is that part of
the program that does the steps,
accessesing the human being or
to the computer system to determine what
action must be taken on top of
the data. So.
But we want to take those steps
and those processing on the data
by machine. Or here's the main
task: we want to design a
computer system. We already
learn how to design a
combinational logic or
combinational circuit to do
some additions or
subtractions or any other operations, I
mean divisions. Then we said
that we need to store
information. So we designed a
sequential logic to store
information and now we want
to put them together to
design a computer system. So
this is the main problem.
The first,
one of the first actually. One
of the first persons that
proposed building a system
or a machine that does the
task for us to solve a problem
was John von Neumann.
As you see here, he was a
mathematician, physicist,
computer scientist, and engineer.
As you can see,
he was a
scientist in many fields.
And one thing is that he came up with is
called polymath, meaning that
because of his interest on
application of the pure science,
in his whole life, he
tried to put all the pure math
in mathematics or physics into
applied sciences to do
practical things, so
that's why he was an engineer. He
created a lot of inventions and
contributed to mathematics,
physics, economy, computing and
statistics. So he was a kind of
genius. And also he did a lot of
contribution to many fields. In the
computing field he proposed
an architecture for a computer
system. So for this task, I mean
designing a computer system, we
want to follow his architecture
or his proposal, which
is one of the simplest system
for computers. Nowadays, we have
more complex computer systems
based on different
architectures. But for the first one,
for this start, we want to start
with this most simplest one,
which is Von Neumann
architecture. And here is the
architecture. So if you are
given a problem among all the
problem sets. If you are given
a problem that is already proved that
it can be solve by programming or
by a computer system, we write a
program that has two parts:
data and algorithm.
Von Newman says that we need a
memory unit to store the data
first of all. So basically when
you define some variable
in C or C++ to store some
information, you are introducing
an area to store some data in the
memory. So we need a memory unit
to install this data, for instance,
the variable A or variable B.
And these are the inputs. Also,
you need to allocate some memory
or you have to store the
results in C. Whatever
you wanted to do on top
of the A and B, you want to
store the result as C.
So you need memory to store
the input and output as the
data. Regarding the algorithm,
you need to know the steps that you have to
apply on the data in order to do
the calculation. For instance,
if you want to add 2
integer numbers, you have to
write some statements or
instructions, so that part of the
algorithm is called coding or
instructions. That part also must
be stored somewhere.
That place is the memory, so we
have to not only store the data,
but also the instructions.
Also, when we store the
instruction or the code, we have
to design another unit to do the
actual instruction or the actual
code. So here, we said that we
wanted to do the addition on top
of A and B and store the result on
C. So this is the statement.
What unit
wants to actually accomplish
this addition and store the
result? We need another unit,
which is called processor,
to do the actual statement or
instruction. So algorithm.
One part is the instruction
you have to store in memory.
One part is the processor to
do the actual instruction.
And there must be some
communication road or
communication platform between
the memory and processor.
So processor needs to find out
what's the value of A,
what's the value of B, and then
do the addition. So this addition
happens at the processor, but
before that processor, you must first
fetch the value of A here, fetch
the value of B here and then
apply the addition. After
applying the addition, the
processor must bring back the
result to the memory location C.
So for this communication, we
need a bus or communication
platform between processor and
memory. As the names actually
implies, bus is the vehicle that
does the transportation between
two locations, so any processing
needs to have a transformation between
memory to the processing unit,
and then back to the result.
This is called the computer,
so this is the Von Neumann
architecture: a memory unit, a
processing unit, and a bus in
order to communicate with the
memory and process. This is a
computer system. You want to build
this.
So these are the principles I
mean in written words. So
basically, the data and
instruction must be both
stored in main memory
units. We need a built-in
memory unit.
The second is that the memory
unit must be designed in a way
that it can be addressable by
location, meaning that here, if
the processor wants to fetch the
value of A, the processor must
be able to find the memory
location that has the value of one
for this location.
And then the processor needs
to find the location for the
variable B. So we have to
design a memory unit that can
be addressable in
order to help the processor
to find a memory location.
And the third principle is this.
We execute the statements
sequentially step by step.
So if you think of it, designing
a computer system that does the
statements or the operation in
parallel, that's not Von
Neumann architecture. That's
another architecture. If you
want to build a architecture
or computer system that is able
to do these statements in a
pipeline, that's not Von
Neumann architecture. So in the
next course, you're gonna see
different architectures for
executing the statements, but
for now, the simplest
architecture is just step by
step, one statement at a time.
Plus, along with the computer, which
has a memory, processor, and bus,
there are other peripheral
devices that helps the
computation. One of the main devices is
the input/output devices or I/O
devices. So basically by the lab
assignments, you know already
that if you want the user to
input the data, so if the data
is not already in your program
and you want the user input your
data, you have to make a way for
your computer to interact with
the user. So when you write the
scanner for, uh, for inputting
the value for A or inputting the
value for B,
you assume that there
is some I/O device, for instance a
keyboard or mouse, for the user
in order to interact with your
program. Also, when you do the
addition and you store the
result and you want to show
the results of the user, you
have to think of a kind of
output device. For instance, the
monitor or printer. So printers
and monitors are those devices
that outputs the result to the
user. So the I/O devices is for
the interaction with the user.
Also, you need to create another
bus to transfer the information
between processor and memory to
the I/O devices.
Also, if you run out of
electric power, you don't want
to lose your processing or your
outputs. You wanna store it
forever or as long as I mean
you can. So there are some
devices that stores the
information without electric
power. For instance, if you
write your output in paper by a
printer, you are kind of making
the data permanent, so you need
to add some devices such as a
flash drive, a hard disk drive,
or other devices that can store
the information without
electric power. For this one,
you have to
create another bus to make a
transformation between the
computer and these devices.
So a computer plus I/O devices,
plus permanent storage is
called a computer system.
That's the difference between
computer and computer system.
Today, in today's
architecture, they usually
considered the
permanent storage as an I/O
device. So if you have a flash
drive or hard disk drive in
order to store the information
forever, this is a kind of I/O.
So you could simply say that a
computer with an I/O device and
including in the I/O devices,
a pernament storage, you
can call this a computer system.
Yes, correct Abdulwahhab, yes.
I mean the SSD, hard drives, or
the flash drives. All of the
hard disk drives. All are
permanent storage and nowadays with
our technology,
we can consider that an I/O device
because you can assume they are
are output devices, so you store
the information or you can
read from them. So you can
assume that they are input, so
the storage can act as an
input or output device.
So in the C language, if you wanted
to store the
information in a file, you have
to use these commands: fprintf,
fscanf, and etc to read from a file or to
print out to a file.
scanf and printf. scanf reads
input from keyboard.
printf outputs to the monitor.
fprintf prints to the hard disk
drive or a file, whereever the
file is. The scanf reads from
the storage. So this
is the final product.
We design our computer system
and we give it to the engineers.
For instance, electrical
engineers or computer engineers
and they build this for us. So
this is called the main board, which
is basically the bus. Different
buses between different devices.
In this main board, which is
basically from our perspective,
this is a bus or communication
platform. We have a place that
we can attach the processor to.
We we have a place that we can
attach the memory units to.
And this main board provides a
communication between the
processor and memory store.
Also, this main board has a
power connection, meaning that it
provides power, electrical power
to the whole system, and as you
can see, there are some part of
the main board for communication
with I/O devices. These are for
keyboards, monitors, flash drives.
These are the communication with
for instance, network interfaces
or with the monitor VGA on
graphic cards, and these are the
communication ports for
determining where the storage is.
For instance, flash drives.
Sorry, hard disk drives.
These are the SATA ports
for the hard disk drives.
These are the PCI Express ports.
So basically the main board is a
communication bus, and it has
some places to attach the units.
Today, we gonna build the memory
unit to be attached to the main
board. Next lecture, we gonna
build CPU or the processor to be
attached to this. In the next
course, you're gonna see how to
build I/O devices.
Any questions so far?
So our task today is
building the memory units of
the computer system.
Next lecture, we are gonna build
the processor unit of the
computer system. And then if you
continue this course to the next
semester, you're gonna build a more
complex processor plus
I/O devices.
Any questions so far?
Yes, but when we said build
them, as we said, we design them,
so we don't actually physically
build them. So let's go back this
main board. So we just design it using
paper or by pen,
like a sketch. Like I mean
the design of an apartment or a
building. But the actual
physical product gonna be
built by the engineers. For
instance, electrical
engineers or computer
engineers.
But by building, we mean
designing by sketch, yes.
So let's start designing memory.
No, no, no. Assembling
means attaching these
units to the main board. So I
believe there are some labs in
the school that teach
you how to assemble the units.
But here we want to design the
units, and then we give it to the
manufacturers, for instance. Oh,
one thing I mean, for instance,
there are two companies that
build the processors: Intel and
AMD. So we design and we give it to
Intel or AMD. They build the
CPU or processors. Also there
are different companies that
build the memories units. So we
designed the memory and
we give them to those
companies. They build the
memories and you go to the market
and you buy this product, and
then you attach it to the main
board. So this is called
assembling. There are some
labs where they teach you. This
is a very easy task for a
computer science student, I mean
to assemble a computer system.
But this is a more complex
task, I mean designing the
memory or designing the processor.
So basically the goal is we
want to build some unit that
stores data and code. So when
we need to store, we have
to deal with flip flops.
One thing is that.
All the data or all types of
information we are dealing with
must be in one way or another,
represented by numbers. For
instance, if you wanna store or
analyze images, you have to
represent the image by numbers. If
you want to analyse audio
signals, for instance, human
speech, you have to represent or
find a way to represent it by
numbers. As we said in the first
lecture, any type of
information: discrete or
continuous, you have to make it
discreet and represented by
numbers. And because we are
building a computer system that
works based on binary systems, and
we said why. Why did we choose
the binary system? Why didn't
choose the octal system or
hexadecimal system? Because the
binary system is more robust
to the noise, so we have to then
convert the numbers in any
numbering system to be in the binary
system. So if the number is in the
decimal system, it would be in
the range of minimum to maximum,
so you have to using the conversion
algorithm we introduced, you
have to convert it to the binary
system and then you have to
store the binary value. Even the
codes, even if you write a
statement, for instance, "C is
equal to A + B" is a textual
statement. You have to find a
way to represent your
instruction into a number and
then you have to convert that
number to binary system.
Even your code must be stored
based on the binary digits.
And then if you find a way to
convert your numbers, whether
the number is representing an
image, whether the number is
representing audio or I mean a
statement in C or C++ language,
whatever the number is representing,
you have to convert it to the
binary system. And by N flip
flops, each flip flop can store 1
bit, so if you have N flip
flops, you can store number within
the range between zero up until
2 to the power of N. You already
knew that. If you are given just
N is equal to 1, you can
represent it as 01. If N is two, you
can represent any number between
zero up until 3.
(WRONG STATEMENT!)
Sorry, if N is 2, 2 to the power
of 2 minus 1. That's why this is
actually the
closing range and opening
range. So if you are giving three
bits, you're able to store up until 2 to
the power of 8
minus one, meaning that zero up
until seven and etc.
For instance, if you wanted to
store any number between
the zero up until 2 to the power
of 4 open range, meaning
including 15, but not including
16. So in order to store any
number between zero up until 15,
you need 4 flip flops or 4 bits.
Then, you can use any type of
flip flops you already know. For
instance, D flip flop, T flip flop,
RS or JK flip flop.
The most simplest one is the D
flip flop. So if you stack 4 D
flip flops, you are able to
store a four bit number and as
you can see here, all these
flip flops are synchronized by
a single clock.
It means that they accept to
store a number
at the first positive edge.
So if I want to store the number
12 in decimal system, you have
to find a way to convert it to
the binary system, and then for
each bit of this binary number
you have to store it. You have
to attach it to the input of the
D flip flop, and at the first
positive edge, zero goes inside
the first D flip flop here.
Again, as you can see, so each
bit is connected to 1 flip flop.
The lower significant bit goes to
the first flip flop and then
up until here. The higher
significant bit to the last
flip flop.
So any 4 bit number can be
stored with 4 D flip flops by
attaching these wires for first
bit, second bit, third, and the
last bit to the input of the
flip flops. So
when you stack the D flip flop,
in order to store the
information, this is called a
register. So register is a stack
or a vector of flip flops in
order to store information.
So here we have a 4 bit register.
If you stack N flip flops in
order to store information, it's
called a N bit register.
But just by one register, you are
able to store 1 number.
What if you need to store 2
numbers? So you create another
register or another row of flip
flops, so the first row or the
first vector for one number,
the second row for the second
number. If you need to store
three numbers, so three
registers. Four numbers, four registers.
So you can store one number in
the first vector, the second
number here. In the third vector, the
the third number goes here. So
with this design, you are able to
store 4 numbers by four 4
bit registers. This wiring that
attaches to the input of the
flip flops is called bus, and
because we are going to store 4
bit numbers, these wires are
called 4 bit bus, meaning that
this is a bus that can carry
only four persons or a 4 bit value.
But there is a problem
with this design.
I claim that now with this
design, we can store 4
numbers and each number can
be between zero up until 2 to
the power of 4 minus 1, meaning
that up until 15. So I can
store 4 numbers. Each number
gonna be between zero up
until 15, but there is a
problem with this design.
What's the problem?
So let's go back to here.
What's the problem with
this design?
Correct, there is no output,
so we can store, but we
cannot read so far. So let's
start with the storing, and
we will discuss about the
reading or I mean,
creating output from this
memory, but even in this
storing step, there's a
problem with this storing.
As you can see here,
the wire for the first bit is
attached to the first column.
The wire for the second bit is
attached to the second column.
So basically because these wires
are attached to all flip flops
in each column, when I load the
information in the bus. For
instance, if I put X here, Y
here, Z here, and W here, it goes
to all the
registers.
Although we have four
registers, but because
the wires are
attached to all rows,
we can store only one number.
One number comes here and it
goes to all rows.
Although, we have four registers.
So here is the problem. So only
one number goes to all
registers. So there's no
difference between having four
registers or one registers
because one number goes to all
of them. So.
In order to solve this problem,
we have to say that
if I wanted to store 1 number,
and we have 4
registers, you have to choose
which register where you want to store
that number. You have four
registers. You can use only one
of them to store 1 number,
instead of just using all the
registers. So here's the task:
which registers? In order to
select the registers, either you
can select a register by its
name. So you pick a name for
each vector, or each row of the
memory. Or for instance here. For the
first row, I select the name A.
For the 2nd row, B. For the third row, C,
and for the last row, D, and whenever I want
to store the information, for
instance in C, I
tell the system, pick the
memory row C, and then store the
information in this bus in the
third row. Another better way is to
select the register by address. As
we said in the Von Neumann
architecture, we want to build a
memory unit that can be
addressable. So the memory
location can be found by
address. By address meaning that
we assign a number to each
register. So for the first
register, 00. For the second
one, 01. 10 and 11. Because we have
four registers, we need 2 bits to
select between four registers.
As you can see here. It is very
similar to assigning a Postal
code or numerical address to a
house. So in order to find 1
unique house in a city, you can
assign one unique number to that
house or a Postal code to that house
to find that place.
So this is very similar to that.
So these numbers are called
addresses for each row or each
location of the memory, and the
one that carries the actual data
is called data bus.
So these red wires are relating
to the actual data and these
are the addresses. So.
The next step is now that I have assigned
an address to each register or
each memory location,
how can I tell the system to
pick one of them? For instance,
if I wanted to store the
information in this bus, the
3rd row. How can I select
the 3rd row by its address
among the other registers?
So Justin says using a MUX.
Very close, but let's see what
is a MUX. We already designed
some combinational logic to select
one output among the N outputs,
only one of them.
So we built encoders, decoders,
multiplexers and demultiplexers.
So Justin says that we can use
MUX. MUX was a device that
selects one input out of N
inputs and attach that input to
the single output.
But here, we are not going to
select from the inputs and attach
it to the single output.
The task here is selecting one
output out of N outputs.
So the the device we need is the
decoder, not the multiplexer.
So remember, what was the
decoder? The decoder was that we
just wanted to enable one
output. One vector, you remember,
one output out of the N outputs.
Whenever we are given a task or
selection, we need a decoder. As
we said in the combinational
logic when we introduced the
decoders. So by a two bit numbers,
we can select among four items.
So we need a decoder that is 2 by
4, and those numbers that select
one output in memory, we call
them an address. So 2 bit address.
And those wires that selects
the memory location is called
address bus.
So those wires that carry the
information is called data bus.
Those wires that carry the
address information is called
address bus. The address bus is
connected to the decoder in
order to select only one
register at a time and
the data carries the
information. So.
Nicholas asked, is the decoder
what applies the hex address to
the memory? For now, we are
building a binary system, so any
number is in the binary system.
So there's no hexadecimal
numbering system. So there's no
base 16. All the numbers are in
binary. The thing is, when you
represent the binary number or
binary address, because it
becomes very huge, we will see that
you will represent it as a hex number,
but in the system, the actual
system, they're all in binary.
So.
So far we could use the decoder
to select one row, but as you
can see here, the output of the
decoder is still not attached
to the memory units.
So still, we have to find a
way to kind of select one row
out of the other rows. So
imagine if you are given 00, we
want to enable this and all the
other outputs are zero, so the
first one is 1. But when it is
1, how can I tell the system
that only the first row of flip
flops gonna accept the input and
avoid or prevent all other rows
to accept the
data? Still the data buses are
attached to all the other rows.
So.
You have to come up with the new
design for the Flip flop.
Just tell the flip flop that if
you are selected then allow the
data bus goes inside the flip
flop. If you are not selected
ignore the input. So yeah we
have to although it is attached
to Flip flop you have to say
that as long as you are selected
you have to allow the input goes
to inside the flip flop.
Otherwise you have to ignore it.
So we assume that let's fix the
flip flop so we have input data
bus. So here is the first
column. So the first bit goes
attached to this flip flop and
this is the select from the
decoder. So the select from the
decoder comes here, and here is
the data bus. The first bit of
the data bus. And here is the
flip flop. We want to fix this
flip flop and want to tell the
system or the flip flop that if.
R0 I mean the register for the
first row is selected, meaning
that if this is 1.
Then allow I0 goes inside.
or right, otherwise, as long as
the select is zero, it means
that you are not selected. Do
not allow I0 to go inside.
So in the D flip flop we said
that as long as the number goes
to the input, it goes inside at
the first positive edge.
But here we want to ask
the D flip flop if you
are not selected store.
The problem with the D flip
flop is that the D flip flop
doesn't have any store action.
You remember the only flip flops
that have the store action are
the Rs flip flop and the JK
flip-flop. D  flip flop
either set or reset or the T
flip flop, Either stores or
compliment, But in T JK and
RS they have a store but for the D
we don't have a store.
But it's easy to extend the D
flip flop to have their store
action, because as you remember
when we built the T flip flop,
we build it by D Flip flop.
So we can come up with a D flip
flop that can store.
One thing is this.
You could say that.
If R0 is 0, meaning that
the flip flop is not selected.
We can make an and with Clock.
As long as they select is 0.
And with the Clock makes the
Clock 0 even if you have
positive edges. Here, because of
this and you always create zero
constant 0 here, there's no edge
here because the selection is 0.
So as long as there is no edge
in the inside the flip flop you
don't accept the input.
This is one way.
To store, however, if R
becomes one. It comes here now.
It allows the Clock goes inside
an at the first positive edge. I0
goes inside the D. This
is one way.
But one thing is that in the
design principle, they say that
never ever touch Clock.
So they say that you shouldn't
manipulate the Clock to the
elements of the system.
You can search about this, but
the main reason is that because
all the units in a computer
system must be act as a
synchronized way kind of harmony
in a system. If you manipulate
or play with the Clock in some
specific unit, you are trying
to make that unit out of sync.
So that's not suggested, so
this design is possible, but
it is not suggested.
Another way is this.
We know that the current value
of D can be go out of the main
output of the D flip flop.
So we have the current value. We
have the input and we have to
decide which one goes.
To the input of the D flip flop
based on the R0. Again I I said.
We have two inputs.
And we want to select
one of them attached
to the D flip flop.
So what combinational unit we
need to add here?
Anybody of you?
So here this is not a
selection task, so decoder
doesn't work. Decoder is
enabling one output or selecting
one output out of the N
outputs. But Here we are
selecting among inputs and
attaching the inputs to the
single output. So the single output
it is here.
How many inputs we have 2.
What device we need?
So do we.
Exclusive or is against an and
The thing is exclusive or once
actually if on top of what if we
do exclusive or of I0 and Q.
We are making a new value out of
these two inputs.
But you are not trying to create
a new value or new operation on
these two. You want to just
simply attach one of them.
To the single output.
Actually, Justin already said
that MUX, you know MUX was a
device that is designed to
select. One input out of an
input an attach it to single
output. So here we have two
inputs. We want to select one of
them to be attached to this
single output. So here is the
MUX. So by the MUX 2 by 1.
We have two inputs, I/O and the
current state of the flip flop.
And we want to select one of
them. So in the MUX we have
switch inputs and this switch
input can be attached to this
select input. So if select is 0.
Comes here zero. Attached. The
first input of the MUX, which is
the current state. So this gonna
be attached here and the Q goes
inside the D so Q back to the.
D it is storing.
However, if R is 1.
It comes here and one attached
the second input to the single
output, so I/O goes to the.
Flip flop
So if we
replace. Not replacing actually.
If we add the two by one MUX
in before the input of all the
flip flops in our memory.
We can support the store
for each flip flop.
So if. I
want to store the information in
the data bus 0101.
In the third memory location,
here's the address of the third
memory location 10.
The address information goes to
the decoder, 10 enables the
third output and all the other
outputs are zero.
And then. The output of the
decoder is attached to these
select input of all the MUX.
Because this is 1.
So in the MUX, when it becomes
one for the MUX 2 by 1, the
second input gonna be selected.
So. The input attached to the D
flip flop as you can see here
and the inputs.
Goes inside zero goes. Here
one goes here. Zero goes here
and one goes here at the
first positive edge.
This value doesn't go to other
flip flops. For instance, for
the first register.
Becaused by this address, the
first output of the decoder is
00, is attached to the MUX of
the first register.
and 10 is attached the MUX the
first input gonna be attached to
single output of the MUX and
the first input comes from the
output of the flip flop.
And so this number doesn't go
inside the first register.
The output of each flip flop
goes inside the 1st, so it means
that the first register gonna
store its previous value.
The same is for the second
register. Also for the last
register. They all the register
stores. The only registered that
accept the input is the this
register, which has one.
And allows the input based
on the marks goes inside
the flip flop.
So by this way, by adding MUX
to the input of the flip flops.
And adding the decoder to select
one row out of N row by a
decoder we build a memory unit
. So here is my question.
If I have.
N wires or N Bit Databus,
meaning that I can store n
bit information.
An if I have N bit wires or M
wires here. In the address bus.
What would be the final size of
my memory measure?
Anybody of you?
Noniko says
that N by M.
Meaning that this matrix
let's practice this matrix.
This is a four speed data
Bus, 2 bit address bus.
Remember.
the number of Flip flop in each
row. Depends on the number of
wires in the databus. So if you
have 4 bit data bus you have it
in each row we gonna have 4 flip
flops because these gonna store
4 bit number. So each row is
gonna have 4 bit flip flop.
However, in the address bus, if
I have two bits address, we can
address 2 to the power of two
rows, so four rows.
If I increase 2 to M is gonna be 2
to the power of.
M correct Jake yes correct?
So if I have M bit address, it
goes to the decorder M by two to
the power of M.
Number of rows in each row. I
can store n bit value.
So in total I'm going to have
two to the power of M rows in
its row n bit number.
So the data bus determines the
number of flip flops in each row
and the number of rows is
determined by the number of
address bits ,address bits If
it is M, we can select 2 to the
power of M different rows.
Usually the number of,
uh? Wires in the data
bus and the number of wires in
the address bus is fixed.
So it's not dynamic. So
basically when we build the bus
bus was the main board. When we
build the bus with fixed the
data bus an address bus. So N and M
is usually fixed. However we
this size of the memory unit's
gonna be at Max 2 to the power
of M. Each row going to have n
bit value. So the memory the
size of the memory module can be
dynamic. Up until this maximum
number number of rows.
Could be less, but the
address bus and data bus
number wires are fixed.
Currently I mean now it is
technology. If you go to the
market and buy a computer
system, this is the just the
most common one. Uh, they have
60 bit data bus, meaning that
the data bus has 64 wires.
It means that you can store
the information within the
range zero up until 2 to the
power of 64.
If you wanted to store
this information in the C
or C++ language, you have
to define the variable as
long unsigned integer.
How how about this sign
integer? So we already says
that if you want to store
the negative numbers.
Uh. In Two's complement, what
would be the range?
Any of you can remember?
If the whole range of numbers
we can represent in positive
numbers are zero up until 2 to
the power of 64, you said that
in twos complement we have to
divide into two range, positive
and negative for the negative
range. Although we represented
as positive numbers, but we
interpret them as the negative
numbers. So what would be the
range of positive numbers and
negative numbers?
So at home you can go back.
And review the Two's complement
system. There we said that if
you are given N positions now,
we know that the positions.
Are the wires in the data bus so
you are given 64 bit position,
So what would be the range of
this negative and positive
numbers? For the data bus,
the current systems have 64 bit,
meaning that you can allocate or
you can find or select.
Among two to the power of 64
memory locations, this is huge.
Memory size. Just see how huge
it is. If you want to be
to buy this maximum memory unit
You must be more than rich
not only rich, more than rich,
and even if you are rich, you
don't. Usually your program or
your problem doesn't need that.
That amount of memory units.
Because I'm in 2 to the Power 64
is this. 2 to the power of 10 it
is kilo. Multiply by two to power 10.
These become mega.
And then two power 10 Giga,
another 2 to the power of 10
Pata and then another 2 to the
power of 10 EXA.
And then.
2 to the Power 64 Another power
of four. 2 to the power of four.
It means that this is 16 exa
memory location. Each location
have 60 bit.
This is a huge amount of memory,
so this is the maximum, but, uh.
You must be. I mean, you might
not be rich. You can afford just
very less, not amount of memory
unit. So if you go
to the market you can find is
16 Gigabit GB.
Memory module for $81.00.
And 16 gigabytes means 16 gig
means that 16 by 2 to the power
of 10 Mega and Mega means 2 to
the power of K. Kilo and kilo
means 2 to the power of 10
units. So in total you're gonna
have 16 two to the power of 30
memory locations. This is a huge
number. You can calculate this
number just for $80.
And if you want to calculate the
number of flip flops you need.
These are the number of rows.
In each row you gonna have 64
bits. Flip flop
So you have to multiply this
number by another 64, so 64 is 2
to the power of 6.
And 16 is to the power of four.
In total you gonna have two to
the power of four D flip
flops. for  $80. Remember
this this is the 16
gigabyte module that the
engineers built for us.
And this you can buy this that
has 2 to the power of 4 D flip
flops for $80.00. You remember
the this is the memory
we designed here? It only has how
many flip flops.
4. Multiply by 2 to the power
of 2 minutes means that only 16
flip flops, only 16.
However. Now it is you can
buy 2 to the power of 4 D flip
flops for $80.
Ann This is the one moment that
I like to show you that.
This is the human progress.
In 1958, Nineteen 59 we
could build only one flip
flop this size.
Just the size of the finger.
Now it is after just less than
60 years, just less than half a
almost half a century, just 50
years in 2012.
We could build a memory unit
that has. 2 to the power 40
flip flops the same size.
And within just 50-60 years.
And this is the human progress,
and this is the true prediction
of the Stanley Kubrick in this
his in his movie.
Ann from Bone to the technology
correctly we have. It took
years. I mean more than I mean
million, I mean.
Not million yes yeah 100,000
years. But within 50 years, 50
years, just 5 0 years.
We could build this technology
so building a spaceship, I mean,
or spacecraft would be just in
20 or 30 years.
Just by I mean, imagine this is
the trip that we took from just
an and gate or gate or exclusive
or gate. Just a simple small
gate up until building this
memory module. Flip flops
that can store this amount
of information.
Just within 50 or 60 years.
So now that we have a memory
module that can store the
information in the data bus by
selecting one of the memory
units by an address bus, the
next task is.
A reading of that memory
location, so we store. After
restoring we want to read, so
sometimes we are not only
storing, we want to read. So for
reading we need another bus
which is only for reading.
So imagine now I want to read
the value in the third register.
So one way would be this.
The output of each flip flop the
green line gonna be the output
of each flip flop.
So if I select the third
register. I can.
Attach the output of the flip
flops in the third register to
the output data bus and select
from them. So again, for other
flip flops for the second
register. I can attach the
output of the flip flops in the
second register. Today data bus
for the output.
The same for the other ones. So
each row gonna have its link to
the output database Data
bus. So we have four rows, so we
have to select between 4 inputs
and attach the four inputs.
One at a time only one of
the inputs to the single output?
So this is selecting one input
out of many inputs an attach it
to the single output. So again
we need a MUX because we have
four inputs for four registers
in the. Here we need 2 sorry, 4
by 1 MUX. This is a mistake.
So 4 by 1  MUX, meaning
that selecting among four inputs
and attaching one input to the
output bus. So the same
address information can goes to
the select. Inputs of the MUX.
So if I for instance.
If I want to just read the value
of the third register.
I put the address information
10. So the 1 zero in the
decoder selects for storing, but
here we don't want to store, so
the same value goes to the
select input of the MUX.
Out of the four inputs, the 10
only selects the third input of
the MUX and attach that to the
output. It means that the value
of the third row of the role is
flip flops in the 3rd row gonna
be attached to the output bus.
As you can see here.
All the other outputs from the
other rows, although they are
attached to the MUX, but they
don't find a way to go to the
output bus because the MUX
doesn't select them.
So the same address goes
to the MUX in order to
select one attached to
the data bus for the output.
This design has a problem.
Anybody can say what's the
problem?
Remember, you know we use the
address. Information for
selecting and attaching to
the output.
So the problem is that as long
as we don't have a positive
edge, the output of the
registers goes to the output
bus. However, if the first
positive edge comes, the input
goes inside. So not only
we write, but also we read at
the first positive.
So the read and write action
gonna be simultaneously so
this is not desirable because
at that time we we don't know
we are reading the new value
or we are reading the
previous value. So we have to
come up with a design that
the task of reading and the
task of writing must be
mutual. I mean at the time we
just do one of them either
read or write.
So this is the problem at the
first positive edge, or we do
both writing and reading and we
don't want that.
Another alternative
designer is this.
This is the flip flop that
we fixed in order to just a
store or right.
Now we want to revise the flip
flop. Buy a control signal. We
want to say that.
If it is selected.
Sorry if it is not selected, the
flip flop is not selected.
Whether we do really alright
doesn't matter, it keeps the
previous value.
So if it is not selected.
We keep it so select those here
0 so the previous value goes
inside. And in the output we
don't wanna output the current
value because this is not
selected. So we make an and as
long as zero. It comes to this
and the output gonna be always
0. So this way if the flip
flop is not selected, the
output is always zero. The
input is storing.
However, if S is 1, meaning
that the flip flop is selected,
then next is whether we want to
read or write. If C is zero, we
want to read. If C is one we
want to write.
So let's do the reading task.
If you select the flip flop to
read. So we basically do this C
zero. It becomes one comes here.
So it means that the output is
whatever inside the flip flop.
Select Read.
Output. The Qt goes to output.
And in the inside here inside
this is 00. Comes here with the
select zero and one becomes zero
is still be reserved.
Or store? We don't want to
allow the input goes inside the,
so we don't write, we just read.
However, if select is 1.
Right, the control become one it
because writing one, so this
becomes zero comes here 0 the
output makes becomes 0, so we
don't read. However, this one
comes here. Select comes here.
The MUX cannot be selected as
gonna select this second input
which is the.
I go to inside the flip flop.
So by the control signal we can.
Select either reading the
Flip flop or writing the
flip flop. Whenever we
select the flip flop.
So this design is a alternative
design at the flip Flop level.
We have select input control
signal an output.
We call this instead of Flip
Flop memory cell.
Because this is the flip flop
that is able to read, write and
to be selected.
And if you replace all these D
flip flop with this memory cell.
We can by the decoder we can
select. By the control signal,
we can say that we are reading
or writing the flip flop.
And.
Input bus. Connect to all the
flip flops and if selected and
then the control is 1, meaning
that writing that that register
if selected and the control is
0, meaning that reading when you
read. For instance, are
the. 3rd Register when you read
meaning that you are selecting
that the selection here is 1.
The control is 0, meaning that
reading. All the outputs gonna
be Qt here.
And the output of other flip
flops are zero, so 000. But the
only one is this one.
making OR. The OR gate only
depends on the output of the
Qt. Here.
So all the output of the
flip flops for all their
items or rows gonna be
OR with each other.
And one thing here is that I
didn't show the Clock.
Because it makes the wiring a
lot of. I mean, uh, I mean
messy. But imagine the clocks
are attached to all the flip
flops, so we don't use. We don't
show the clocks an wires anymore
because we assume this is
connected to all the units.
So the control.
Signal input bus address bus.
This is called for the
control. You only need one
wire just to read right? So
this is called control bus.
So here is another example where
we want to write. We make the
control one. And we select the
third register this time.
Inside the memory cell.
The input gonna go inside the
flip flop and the output gonna
be 0. So zero goes here and all
the output. Bus is always 0.
So in total we have data bus
for writing. We have data bus
for reading. m bit other spots
to selecting a memory location
and K bit control Bus here. The
cables does only one read or
write, but it might be more than
that for the control bus.
One question you could ask is
that is it possible to use the
same input bus for the output
bus? Think about that. It is
possible to use the same bus.
For writing or reading.
It's very easy to design one
single wiring for both
writing and reading.
And another thing is that.
What's the access time for
selecting one memory location?
So read about that. But The
thing is, uh, because of the
decoder at anytime. If you
provide the value to the decoder
by some propagation deley, we
can select one row.
Whether it is the first row or
the last row, always same time
have? I mean takes, that's why
we call them random access
memory. Random Access memory is
the memory that the location can
be selected regardless of the
location of this collection.
Whether we are selecting the
first location. Or the last
location always same time.
That's why we call this.
Random access memory. So
any memory location fixed.
delta T.
Regardless of the location, the
sequential access actually is
not this way because the
sequential access meaning that
if you access the closest
location takes less time Farther
location, takes more time, but
the memory unit we designed
because it depends on the only
decoder. Whatever the location
of the memory always fixed
amount of time.
So we could build the
memory unit. We designed the
memory unit. The next step up.
The next task is building the
CPU, but one thing I wanted to
say that. If you build a memory
unit. Which is random access
again, but remove the write bus.
Remove any write pass. We just
read about that memory is
called. We call this read only
memory or ROM.
So usually the memory units are
RAM, meaning that we can write
and read based on the random
access to each row. However, if
you remove the write bus, we
just allow the reading it's
called ROM read only memory.
So read only memory is still
random access memory, but
without the writing Bus.
And. This is the ROM,
so same design without the
writing bus.
So next lecture we gonna design
processor. An see how the
processor used. Output data bus
input data bus to read and write
from memory, and do the
calculation. So you have 3
minutes after 9;50, so I'm done
with today's lecture. So in
today's lecture we could build a
memory. And then we can access
each location to store the
information. The memory unit
design is a random access
memory, meaning that the
selecting the memory location
doesn't matter where the memory
location is. And we have ROM,
meaning that the memory
location, memory units that have
a random access ability, but.
We don't have right bus for
that, only we read before that
we use them for static data.
So yes,  designing
the memory in, it's gonna be in
the exam. All the lectures for
this week's gonna be in the
exam. Yes. When it says
here. Uh, one question would be
this. How can you use?
Put me back here.
How can we design a system that
reuse the same bus for writing
and reading? It's very simple.
Is on the combination logic
based on the multiplexers?
You can design the one single
bus for accomplishing two
different tasks. Giving us
an exam review.
You mean exam review review
after the i mean for your
marking or practicing the
exam questions?
I'm
not,
uh.
Line.
Oh, uh, at the end of this week
at the end of this week,
actually, I give you the topics
we're gonna cover in the final
exam. And I try to create a
mocking exam to practice on the
format of exam, but the topic
we're going to cover in the
final exam. I'll give you, uh,
in the in an announcement also
in the blackboard for sure. At
the end of this week.
After we could design A
processor, very simple
processor, we know what would be
the topics of the final exam.
Any other questions?
Quartz crystal controlled the
Clock speed in all computer
systems. Uh is its speed control
with the voltage running through
this system 01 thing about the I
mean the speed on the Clock. As
long as this course matters is
that the Clock is just, I mean
it chain of as zero and one
pulse is OK.
How we generate the pulse is
it's an engineering principle,
so basically I don't have enough
knowledge for that, so I don't
know how can we.
How can we generate that fast
number of pulses within a
second? You know, for instance,
for the current CPUs.
They have a for instance
3. Megahertz, meaning that
sorry. 2.1 GHz
so it basically 2
GHz, meaning that 2000
Mega. Pulse per second. This
huge amount of pulse within a
second, uh, I don't know. How
can they generate? I don't have
enough, but this is a kind of
engineering thing you have to.
Go to computer engineering,
electrical engineering, how they
physically build a system that
generate that amount of pulses.
So I cannot answer this question
that what's the physical
structure? But about the
second question is speed.
Voltage running through the
system, or actually if you're
talking about the the voltage is
always the same. So basically,
if a voltage is positive, five
as we show, if the level of
voltage is more than for
instance 3 point, something up
until five. We consider that as
one. If it is less than that, we
consider 0. How I think what
you are telling is that.
The power. Definitely the system
that needs to create that amount
of pulse need a huge amount of
power and power. Depends on the
watt. For this system, so you
need huge amount of power,
meaning that current instead of
voltage voltage is the same.
Positive 5.
Uh.
Justin says Crystal Oscillation
is wavelength divided by period.
Uh.
So honestly, I don't have a, I
mean that knowledge so.
You can even ask, uh?
Electrical engineers and
computer engineers. About this.
So I mean, in the computer
science we are dealing with
design, so we don't for us pulse
or just chain of 01.
Thank you.
Usually I mean, uh and
personally, I always was
interested in. Uh.
Design tasks, but I never, I
mean go deep into the
engineering tasks. One reason is
that if you are involved, it is
good to know some, uh.
Engineering I mean field because
it helps with the better design.
But I never had the chance
to study those concepts,
but definitely I mean,
it's an interesting thing,
because let's back here.
I mean engineering that huge
amount of flip flops.
Even if you write it in a paper,
you cannot put all amounts of
flip flops in a paper but just a
pen in this small.
I think it's a very I mean
high tech engineering
technology.
It's interesting, yes.
You too have a great day, so
I'm going to be in the
office, so if you have any
question I can take this
question in the Office hour.
Yes, definitely it's a sci-fi.
Yes. It's as I said, I mean.
Uh. Again, whenever I see this
movie, I mean I saw the Space
Odyssey multiple times.
And yeah, it's huge.
Sci-fi, yes. Have
a great day guys.